# Designing Applications:

## Introduction

App development is a task that may seem overly simple, made up of only code and some graphic design. However the multitude of principles to follow in this field are evident that there is so much more to app development, that it is an art, and how important the principles and guidelines are. For the purpose of enlightening other developers, exploring the principles of app development, and further guiding my programming journey, I present a manifesto of ideas and points defining the design process for the app I created this year.

## Manifesto

### 1. Design Should be Helpful, Inclusive, and Intuitive.

Without the miracles of software design we use every day, our society would be nowhere compared to where it is now. Through programmers’ abilities to intuitively design apps that help all kinds of users accomplish a variety of tasks, we have software to do almost anything we want at the click of a button. This is why an important code of ethics for software design should be made up of these things. As long as all software is helpful to users, inclusive to as many people as possible, and intuitive then the programming community will be able to push and enhance each other, as well as upgrading the experience of consumers. For example, apps such as Facebook or Instagram are helpful to connect you with other people around the world, and to share your experiences with friends and family. Google translate is an extremely inclusive tool, being that it allows anybody to communicate with another in any other language (to an extent). The increasing intuition of developers around the world truly is upgrading the experience of the user. For example, artificial intelligence and machine learning are technologies that have revolutionized how many applications work, from search engines to medical help on your smartphone. 

### 2. Design for All Users

Not only is the actual content of an application supposed to be helpful and inclusive, but accessibility of the app itself is an important task to take on. For example, it may be very difficult for those who are blind or visually impaired to use a map application such as the HM Convenience Map I designed this year. To aid those who might need help using this application, text-to-speech with the buttons and labels in the map application could be very useful. Another amazing example of accessibility and its applications is Lookout by Google. This is an app that uses your smartphone camera to look at objects around you and identify important ones that might be of use to those who are visually impaired, such as exit signs. Designing apps to be accessed by or to specifically help users like this is an important aspect of design that is not to be overlooked.

### 3. Task Analysis is Key

Task Analysis is an activity that one does before designing any application where they identify something that needs to be done, something that they can assist in doing, or something that is difficult for some people. Designers will then use the tasks they discover to guide their design and development process. Earlier this year, we studied Task analysis as a class and did our own to find the tasks we wanted to assist with using our apps, my tasks being focused around convenience and finding available resources around school easily. The reason that this step of the design process is so important is because without a clear idea of your goal and the job that is to be done, you will spend too much time deliberating while designing instead of having a set function for your product to achieve.

### 4. Prototyping and Testing your App

Prototyping is creating a first(or early) version of an application for the purpose of testing and refining. During the process of prototyping and testing along with the other groups in our class, I learned that the fidelity of your prototype is a very important factor. If your prototype is too low-fidelity, such as an incomplete on-paper app, it may be difficult and inefficient to test with potential users. However, if you spend too much time fleshing out the prototype you wish to test with, you may not have enough time to fully explore the rest of the design process or to develop your beta release. As a group, we made a medium-high fidelity prototype on a website called Figma, an app that allows users to create application-like interfaces that mimic how an actual website or smartphone app would work, without all of the necessary preparations and coding. We used this platform to perform our usability tests with our participants and it was very helpful, something that would have been very difficult with a lower fidelity or paper prototype. However, something that occurred to our group was we spent a lot of time on our Figma prototype, resulting in us never finishing a beta version to present to the class. For this reason, it is important to find a comfortable spot between fully investing in something that is only a prototype and making your first version clear enough to use.

### 5. Think About your Users in Advance
Many apps are targeted to a specific user base, and one can use this to their advantage when designing an app. For example, the app I developed was meant to be used by high school/middle school students on their phones who need to find printers and chargers around their school, so a simple and easy to read map interface would be the best for the users we will have. This is because on a small phone while walking between classes it can be difficult to read small and intricate text or to have to navigate complicated menus, so a simple map with large buttons and affordable design is important. Another example of this is navigation apps such as Waze or Google Maps. When using this app for navigation, users are also probably driving and do not have much time to look at the phone screen, as they must pay attention to the road. To compensate for this, these apps have large and centered icons and displays that show where the user is and the path ahead of them. This makes it much easier for the driver to quickly glance at the screen and understand where they need to go.

## Conclusion

These 5 principles exist to guide the process of design research and software design, because the backbones of design are so much more important than they seem at first glance. Almost everything we use was designed by other humans, and so many of us rely on the way that other people have designed these apps and products. And so in the process of become software engineers and app developers, it is very important for us to follow principles and guidelines that make for useful, accessible, and important applications that will help people around us in the future.

